SQL Monitor is a feature in Oracle Database that provides real-time monitoring and detailed diagnostics for long-running and resource-intensive SQL statements. It helps database administrators (DBAs) and developers identify performance bottlenecks, optimize SQL execution, and ensure efficient resource utilization.

Key Features of SQL Monitor:
Real-Time Monitoring:

Tracks the execution of SQL statements in real-time.

Provides detailed information about the progress and performance of long-running queries.
Detailed Diagnostics:

Captures metrics such as elapsed time, CPU usage, I/O operations, and memory consumption.

Identifies stages of execution (e.g., parsing, execution, fetching) and their respective durations.
Visualization:

Offers graphical representations of SQL execution plans and performance metrics.

Helps in understanding the flow of execution and identifying bottlenecks.
Alerts and Notifications:

Can be configured to send alerts when SQL statements exceed predefined thresholds for resource usage or execution time.
Integration with AWR (Automatic Workload Repository):

SQL Monitor data is often stored in AWR for historical analysis and comparison over time.
Access via Enterprise Manager (EM):

SQL Monitor data can be accessed and analyzed through Oracle Enterprise Manager (EM) Cloud Control or Database Express (DB Express).
Focus on Long-Running Queries:

Primarily targets SQL statements that run for an extended period or consume significant resources.

How SQL Monitor Works:
When a SQL statement meets certain criteria (e.g., long execution time, high resource consumption), Oracle automatically starts monitoring it.

The monitoring data is collected and stored in memory and, optionally, in AWR for later analysis.

DBAs can query the V$SQL_MONITOR and related views to access the monitoring data.

Common Use Cases:
Performance Tuning: Identify and optimize slow-running SQL statements.

Troubleshooting: Diagnose issues such as excessive I/O, CPU usage, or locking.

Capacity Planning: Understand resource consumption patterns for SQL workloads.

Auditing: Track the execution of critical SQL statements for compliance or security purposes.

Key Views for SQL Monitor Data:
V$SQL_MONITOR: Displays real-time monitoring data for SQL statements.

V$SQL_MONITOR_STATNAME: Provides descriptions of the statistics collected by SQL Monitor.

DBA_HIST_SQL_MONITOR: Stores historical SQL monitoring data in AWR.

Example Query to Access SQL Monitor Data:
SELECT sql_id, sql_exec_id, status, elapsed_time/1e6 "Elapsed (s)", cpu_time/1e6 "CPU (s)", io_time/1e6 "I/O (s)"
FROM v$sql_monitor
WHERE status = 'EXECUTING'
ORDER BY elapsed_time DESC;

This query retrieves information about currently executing SQL statements, including their elapsed time, CPU usage, and I/O operations.

Enabling SQL Monitor:
SQL Monitor is enabled by default in Oracle Database. However, you can control its behavior using initialization parameters such as:
SQL_MONITOR: Enables or disables SQL monitoring (default is TRUE).

SQL_MONITOR_BINDS: Controls whether bind variable values are captured (default is FALSE).

SQL Monitor is a powerful tool for diagnosing and optimizing SQL performance in Oracle Database.


