The error you're seeing is not directly related to SSH or your Git key. Instead, it's a GPG (GNU Privacy Guard) signing issue when trying to commit with Git. Here's what's happening:

Error Breakdown

error: gpg failed to sign the data
fatal: failed to write commit object

gpg failed to sign the data: Git is configured to sign commits with GPG, but it failed to do so.

fatal: failed to write commit object: Because GPG signing failed, Git couldn't create the commit.

Why This Happens
Git is configured to sign commits with GPG (commit.gpgsign = true).

GPG is not properly set up (missing key, wrong permissions, or not in the agent).

You don't have a GPG key configured for signing.

How to Fix It

Option 1: Disable GPG Signing (Temporary Fix)

If you don't need GPG signing, disable it for this commit:
git -c commit.gpgsign=false commit

This bypasses GPG and allows the commit to proceed.

Option 2: Fix GPG Signing (Permanent Solution)

If you want to keep GPG signing, ensure:
GPG is installed:

      gpg --version
   
If missing, install it:

macOS: brew install gnupg

Linux: sudo apt install gnupg (Debian/Ubuntu) or sudo yum install gnupg (RHEL/CentOS).
GPG key is available:

List your GPG keys:

          gpg --list-secret-keys --keyid-format=long
     
If no key exists, generate one:

          gpg --full-generate-key
     
GPG key is trusted by Git:

Export your GPG key ID:

          gpg --list-secret-keys --keyid-format=long grep sec awk '{print $2}'
 cut -d'/' -f2
     
Tell Git to use this key:

          git config user.signingkey YOUR_GPG_KEY_ID
     
GPG agent is running (for password prompts):

Start gpg-agent:

          gpgconf --launch gpg-agent
     
If using macOS Keychain, ensure gpg is set up to work with it (may require pinentry-mac).
Test GPG signing:

      echo "test" | gpg --clearsign
   
If this fails, debug GPG issues separately.

Option 3: Reconfigure Git to Not Sign Commits

If you never want GPG signing, disable it globally:
git config --global commit.gpgsign false

Now git commit will work without GPG.

Why SSH Key (GIT_SSH_COMMAND) Didn't Affect This
Your GIT_SSH_COMMAND was correctly set, but the error is unrelated to SSH.

The problem is GPG signing, which is a separate Git feature.

Summary of Fixes
Issue Solution

GPG signing failing Fix GPG setup (gpg --list-secret-keys, git config user.signingkey)
Don't want GPG signing Disable with git -c commit.gpgsign=false commit or git config --global commit.gpgsign false
SSH key issue (unrelated) Your GIT_SSH_COMMAND was correct, but not the cause of this error

Final Recommendation
If you don't need GPG signing, disable it temporarily or permanently.  

If you want GPG signing, ensure your GPG key is set up and working.  

Would you like help setting up GPG signing properly? 🚀
